So a second dimension, of thinking about
how we can bring analytics to Staffing,
is thinking about how we evaluate the
different ways that people can be staffed.
So, if you think about most jobs,
I have here a representative organization,
it's a pyramid.
How do people get into these empty jobs,
designated by hollow eggs?
Well, see one way that people
enter them is by being hired.
Another way is by being promoted.
And a third way that people might
enter jobs, is kind of sideways.
Now, if I'm a manager and
I'm thinking about staffing.
A question that I really care about is
what are the trade offs towards this.
Should I be doing more to
promote internal development and
promotional mobility,
is that money well spent?
Or would it be better off
spending that money to try and
beef up our recruitment efforts?
Which of these is like
to be more effective?
So this scenario where
I've done some work and
kind of give a little more
detail how you do this analysis.
So I took a bunch of data from
a division of a large investment bank.
Basically, just told me how people
were performing in their jobs and
how they were paid in kind of
snapshots year by year by year.
And so you could go through this and
pull out for each person, okay,
how did they get into that job?
Were they hired into it?
Did they come from a lower level job
in the organization, being promoted?
Do they come from somewhere else in
the firm, were they being transferred?
And then see which of those shapes,
the various performance metrics,
as well as how they're paid, okay?
Now in doing this there are a bunch
of things that I was worried about.
So one is, obviously everybody gets
hired at some stage, so kind of
worry about what happens after somebody's
been hired a while and been promoted.
So let's only look at how people
entered their current job.
Another big issue is you've got
a lot of different jobs here, okay?
So if I just take everybody
who's been hired, and
everybody who's been promoted and
compare them.
Well that's really going to be conflated
with the fact that some jobs are likely to
hire more and
other jobs are likely to promote more.
And so really I wanted to
use very detailed controls,
talked a bit about this in
multi-variable regression.
You kind of strip out
those job-level effects.
And so I could conceptually think about
comparing people in the same job.
What are their outcomes based on how they
entered the job, and kind of equivalent
to that, I also wanted to only have jobs
that could be entered in multiple ways.
And so, two things I wanted to do.
So, first of all,
let's drop all the lower level jobs
that you can't enter by promotion.
And in addition, I also wanted to drop
anybody who I didn't see entering the job.
Also one of the big concerns is
people particularly over time their
performance changes.
And so I only wanted people I knew
when they entered that job and
how they entered that job.
So kind of clean the data set first and
then look at these relationships.
In this case I saw quite a lot going on.
So first off I saw
differences in performance.
So the people who are hired into the job
perform much worse than the people
who are promoted for
about the first two to three years.
Much more likely to get poor ratings, much
less likely to get the highest ratings.
You saw over time their
performance converges.
And so it's not necessarily
they are hiring worse people.
But it kind of really said something about
how long it's taking people to get up
to speed in this organization.
Then you can't just transition and
get off to a running start, okay?
People need to learn even
when we're coming and
high levels require experience from us.
The other piece of it that I
saw that was quite interesting.
So even though there
are performance differences,
people who were hired were
performing less well.
It was also the case that people who
are hired were getting paid more, okay?
So we're paying people a lot more, and
being able to perform worse doesn't sound
like a good deal for the organization.
And these were differences that were
actually much more persistent than
the performance differences.
And we can dig into that, it's possible
to see that a lot of that has to do with
the differences in who you're hiring,
when you hire from outside you don't
know much about people's performance.
You tend to want to make sure
you have a good resume and
so these people coming in from
outside then have more education,
more experience as an employer,
you have to pay more for that.
So I certainly thought this
is a fun study to do but
I think it has some practical
implications right?
If I was in an organization
I want to know this, why?
First, okay, maybe we should think more
seriously about our internal development.
On the margin,
hiring looks quite expensive.
The second thing that it really tells
me is wow, it's taken a long time for
our hires to get up to speed, so
what are we doing about onboarding?
How do we help accelerate
that process of learning?
That's something we want to put in place,
and
maybe that's something we
also want to assess, seek on
all these performance ratings, converging
more rapidly once we've done that.
So this kind of evaluation of
staffing options can tell you a lot.
We have another example of doing
this kind of work which was done by
JR Keller who's at Cornell.
He did this when he was a PhD student
at Wharton, we're very proud of him.
He looked at another difference in
the way that companies staff jobs.
Obviously, a lot of people
move jobs inside firms.
Well they do so
often in two very different ways.
And so kind of a stereotype is this idea
that kind of your manager walks in one day
and says congratulations
you've been promoted.
That happens a lot but the other thing
that can happen is that jobs are posted.
So somebody puts together a formal job
description, they stick on a website,
maybe they put it up on bulletin boards
and say we need somebody to fill this job.
If you're in the organization
you very welcome to apply and
then we'll go through and
we'll see who does best.
The organization is looking at,
they did a lot of filling jobs both ways.
In fact, I think most organizations
now use both these mechanisms.
Well, from the HR department
I'm kind of curious which
of these should I be encouraging?
Which tends to work better?
And so he looked at all of the outcomes of
people entering their jobs through these
to see are there differences.
And he found they really were.
So what he found in particular were some
real advantages of internal posting.
First of all, it enables people
to do more unusual things.
And so the career paths that most people
made through internal posting were more
unusual, which kind of makes sense.
It's people from throughout
the organization saying I'm not clear on
what I'm to be doing now.
That looks more interesting,
let's go try that.
What's more intriguing was that he also
found that performance was systematically
higher after people had
moved jobs through posting
versus the manager just
sponsoring them for a job.
One reason for that, potentially, is we're
looking at a wider pool of applicants.
And so we're taking the best
person from a much greater pool,
people who we wouldn't necessarily
have thought of for the job, but
are interested and
turn out to be very good at it.
And certainly,
we see this kind of way to pool.
But the other thing that was really
interesting was that people who had been
in the same group all along.
And got promoted into a job through
posting also performed higher than if
they'd been promoted into the job
through sponsorship,okay?
So, it's not just about
getting a richer pool, and
I think the story that seems most
plausible here kind of back to hiring.
So I talked there about kind of more
structured process doing better.
So kind of posting some more
structured processes as well.
And what we think's going
on is the managers,
when they're forced to think about it,
when they know they're
going to have to justify that decision
to the people that they didn't promote.
Take a more structured decision making
approach and probably do it better.
The same time we saw some
things were good for workers or
bad for the organization,
depending upon your perspective.
We also so paved change depending
on how people entered the job.
Looked holding everything else constant,
but
when people moved jobs by posting,
they got more of a pay raise.
We think that has a lot to do with
negotiations inside the firm.
When you've established
you're the best candidate,
you have a stronger negotiating position.
When you've been forced to
apply through a market,
you may also feel more empowered to
actually go out and ask for more money.
And so we see yet
again how people are staffed matters.
And the value of within your organization
trying to get a handle on which of
the processes are better, which should we
be encouraging, and which shouldn't we.
Of course when we think about making those
decisions one of the things we worry about
a lot is what's really
driving these relationships.
Does this mean that if we do more
posting we'll see better performance.
And that gets in to issues of causality
and I want to spend a few minutes in
the next segment just talking about
how we think about causality and
where we need to worry about it.